---
title: "The Age of AI"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Post Formats
  - quote
---

> First things first - this wasn't spit out by ChatGpt or Gemini or any other AI model. This is purely from my head to fingers, neurons firing away, good ol' human machine. Slow, yet this is what I want to preserve in my corner of the internet. Flaws, grammatical errors, thoughts without structure
> et al - they find home right here. I might be one of the last few of a generation that may enjoy this slow, laborious process, so I'll try to preserve this. Who knows, half a century from now this may fall into the handcrafted section that old trades like basket weaving or
> exquisite embroidery work have already fallen into. I'll hold an essay writing live show to whatever Gen-dash exists that day to show how our slow machines worked, unaided by any of the marvels that they would have probably been born into. Indispensable and inseparable from them.
> All this I say with a pompous air about myself that I may hold the fort and not give up on the last vestiges of basic human skills, but alas I'm human! We fall fast to what makes our life easy. Sure, I may hold the live show, but comfortably carried around on stage my bionic exoskeleton and after I've switched off the neuralink cloud connector that has been the orchestra conductor of my brain.
> I'm part of the last generation that has seen the switch from the non-internet to the all encompassing internet era we live in now. I remember having a big fat TV at my home, on which late night movies needed to be watched with utmost patience as the advertisement duration kept increasing as you neared the climax. This was a time without much agency in entertainment or connection, but interestingly higher agency in what you really wanted to do with your life. Think about it - there was no notification bar in your life that could hold you hostage to
> whichever of your hundreds of apps decided to apprise you of something you did not even want to know at that moment. A friend's whatsapp message, a news headline, a stock market crash. Cal Newport's 'Deep work' emphasizes on the concept of Attention. He says what you have your attention on determines your happiness. Your happiness is a sum total of what your mind focussed on. Isn't this so true? Irrespective of where each of us is physically, our mind really could be in a whole different location or scenario. And this attention of ours is what the smartest people of our generation working in big tech, are fighting for. The battle for your attention is between you and a huge conglomerate of the smartest folks who are highly incentivised to make you lose. Most people have not realized this war is on. And without awareness, how does one fight this war, let alone win?
> The journey from TV, to now Netflix and Youtube has been one of convenience and higher control over what I want to watch, for how long, and what time of the day. From landline phones to mobiles and apps, humans have officially entered one of the steepest parts of the graph of our advancements. Things are going to move very quick from here. What I hope for humanity is that there are guard rails in place to prevent us from crash landing. In the past, more than a decade, an amazingly high number of people have connected to the internet. In my home country, India, I have seen and heard of this advancement happen even among people who are below a certain income level. Moore's law coupled with cheaper data rates have ensured that the internet reaches as many hands as possible. But, did we ensure the guard rails were in place?
> Was internet education given a priority? Have people been taught how to differentiate between fake and original content? Have people been taught how to verify news using citations? Its akin to giving people sportscars and telling them to forget about where the brakes are - just
> keep going you'll be fine. Well apparently we've seen we don't do so fine. People falling for fake news, scams, going deep into ideological bubbles and being radicalized has become par for the course. We have young people struggling to keep up with their peers pushing their way into their notification bars. And unlike the good ol days when you had a max of 5 friends that your really met frequently, today you're being greeted by hundreds of friends via your apps. Connecting has become so easy that its lost its premium value. Our older generation is no less addicted to their phones, because hey, which human can resist a good dopamine shot. And while the world is still grappling and coming to terms with the current web format, we've got AI enter the room.
> Every algorithm that was already there is going to get a steroid shot.
> What gives me some semblance of hope here is that humans do tend to have a self correcting nature. I have hope in the fact that every younger generation, in its attempt to be cooler than the previous, manages to correct the wrongs of the previous. The elders force some of the old ways on them, the debates and dialogues between them pursue, and then somehow the best practices survive. But since we're on the steep part of the curve of change, humans do not have the luxury of this self correcting cycle. Change comes in faster than you can come to terms with it.
> Self correction mechanism have to be more deliberate and quicker. And the only way is to formulate an education system that encourages critical thinking and gives students the tools and framework to understand what is good for humans at the most fundamental level.
> Our evolution happened over thousands of years, and so we know what are the things that can wreak havoc, if we try to change them in one generation. Give people this knowledge so that they may be mindful when they subject themselves to such changes. For example, our ancestors did not spend all day sitting on a rock. They moved. A lot. This basic awareness nudges us to move around. Instead of choosing the path of easiest dopamine fulfillment, this self awareness can force young people to choose what their ancient-design bodies can approve of more. 
  
